Save Your Self from the HellMany people living on this planet don't care about the afterlife although their Religion tells them sinners will be damned in Hell. 
Steps
Choosing Your Belief
Think about your current belief. Have you ever thought about your current belief? Is there evidence to prove your belief? You must think more about what you believe and if your belief is backed by evidence,logic and reason.Keep in mind that many Religious leaders will lie to you and prevent you from thinking for yourself. 
Focus on this life,rather than what happens after it. Don't fear the reaction of the people around you. If you have to live in another place to follow the belief you're certain it's right then change it! Put in mind that your unlimited life depends on your belief. 
Choose a new belief. If you thought about your belief, compared it to other religions and found it was wrong or found that there was better believes then you should follow it! 
Learn what sins are deemed as "Unforgivable" in different religions, so that you may try to avoid them, should you ultimately choose a particular faith. Eg: In Christianity, Blasphemy against the Holy Spirit is unforgivable; In Islam, worshipping idols is unforgivable; In Judaism, taking the Lord's Name in vain is unforgivable. 
After Choosing a Belief
Be a good person. Have good personality ,do good things and follow great morals like truthfulness, honesty and loyalty. Make yourself an example of the good human. Put in mind that you make your personality by your choices. Put in mind that your choices will make your predestination. 
Have a successful life. Our god created us to benefit the whole humanity. If you are a student study hard and try to be the best student. If you are an employee work hard and try to be the best employee. If you are a sportsman try to be the best in your field. Whatever your work was try to be the best to benefit yourself and people around you. Do all of that to get the prize from your god not from people around you. 
Pray. Ask your god to light your life. If you want to have a good pray believe that your god listens every word you say. Ask your god to forgive you. Ask him to solve your problems. Ask him to make you live in paradise after your death. 
Tips
Pray and meditate constantly. Prayer and meditation is the first step towards choosing Heaven, in the afterlife.
Have a healthy respect for human life on Earth. Obey the Commandment, "Thou shalt not kill."
Try to be as charitable as possible.
Be very humble and modest.
Warnings
Do not let people prevent you from thinking rationally and if it precedes logic and evidence then it is not right.
Don't be from people who don't believe anything or who don't care about what will happen after their death or who say simply: after I die I will know what should happen to me! Our god created us to care about our unlimited life and gave us a mind to think about our final destination.
Stay away from beliefs that teach you to blindly follow and not question their guidelines. If it teaches intolerance towards anyone because of their Gender,Sexuality,Race,Disability or anything else it is not a thing to advocate or follow.