 1. IntroductionAgriculture is one of the largest water consumers on the planet. In many semi-arid areas, dryland viticulture is becoming increasingly more challenging and sometimes is reconverted into irrigated crops, thus there is concern about the water scarcity increase linked to climatic change. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) predicts an increase of average temperatures and the frequency of extreme drought and/or warm events [1]. So, for most viticulture areas, improving the water use efficiency (WUE) of the grape is becoming more and more important to secure the sustainability of vineyards [2,3]. There are different ways to improve grape WUE, and the most immediate way is to adjust irrigation dosage and schedule [4]. However, to explore the genetic variation inside grapevine varieties and clones, and to identify the genetic material characterised by a better WUE, is also a promising way to improve the vineyard WUE [5,6].The WUE can be measured at different spatial and temporal scales [7,8]. From an agronomic approach, the crop WUE (WUEcrop) refers to the final yield and total water consumed. At the leaf level, intrinsic WUE (WUEi) reflects the balance between carbon gain (An) and stomatal conductance (gs). Several studies on grapevines have intended to link the different scales and results are sometimes contradictory, showing good or bad correspondences [8,9,10,11,12]. Fortunately, for the wine industry the main concern is not only to reach a high productivity, but rather a higher quality of grapes. Grape quality components are largely dependent on an efficient water deficit, which can be achieved by adjusting irrigation but also the plant density or pruning management, [13,14,15,16].In either case, to classify genotypes’ WUE, the measurements of leaf gas exchange have been recognised as a useful tool because it is feasible to screen a large quantity of genotypes grown under field conditions and to characterize their behaviour under different water statuses [17,18]. This allows the revealing of a genetic variability of drought tolerance and WUEi between several vine cultivars [17,18,19]. In the same way, some progress has also been made by using other techniques such as the δ13C [20,21,22].In our research group, after having identified differences in WUEi at the cultivar scale [17,18,19,23], and considering the narrow rules of wine regions to introduce new varieties, the next step has consisted of an intra-cultivar variability evaluation [24]. First, our study showed such variability in a Tempranillo clonal collection. With respect to a wide cultivar collection, the intra-cultivar variability was at least 80% of the shown variability among cultivars [25]. In more recent work, it has been shown that an intra-cultivar genetic variability of WUEi exists among several clones of the Tempranillo cultivar [26].It is important to note that there are several ways to estimate the WUE of a given genotype under realistic field conditions. Most of the studies showed average gas exchange values under different water conditions. As mentioned above, the WUEi, or photosynthetic water use efficiency, is obtained from the quotient between net photosynthesis and stomatal conductance, (AN/gs) and is largely used to qualify drought resistance or water scarcity responses in plants [27,28]. However, there is a strong mathematical influence of gs upon WUEi, because the soil water depletion is followed by a progressive reduction in gs thus WUE is largely dependent on the soil water availability for the plant [26,29,30]. This implies that the comparison of the WUEi should be done under a similar range of gs. To overcome this dependency and compare under the whole range of gs samples, we have used a method proposed by Tortosa et al. [25]. This consists of establishing a general WUEi-gs relationship (log transformed for linearity) based on the data of all genotypes that, in general, presents a high correlation coefficient. Then, an average of the residuals of each genotype (observed-predicted value) is calculated (and expressed in percentage), to rank the given genotype among the rest.As part of a wide program to identify Tempranillo clones with enhanced WUE, the main objective of the present study was to evaluate whether, under realistic field conditions, the previously observed clonal differences in WUEi within Tempranillo cultivars were affected by environmental complex variations such as the “year effect,” commonly reported for grapevine harvest and quality. 2. Material and Methods 2.1. Experimental Sites and Plant MaterialThe experiments were conducted in two experiment sites, both in Northern Spain. The first one in the experimental field of the ICVV (Instituto de las Ciencias de la Vid y el Vino, Logroño, La Rioja, Spain), called “La Grajera.” In this site, five clones (232, 807, 1048, 1052, 1084) were measured during five consecutive years. The second site was located at the Roda estate (Bodegas Roda, Haro, La Rioja, Spain), where nine clones (6, 44, 78, 109, 121, 155, 215, 260, 463) were measured during three consecutive years. In both sites, plants were grafted onto 110-Richter rootstock, trained as a double cordon system in La Grajera, and head-trained bush system in Haro. The vine density in La Grajera were 2600 plants Ha−1 and in Haro 3300 plants Ha−1.Climatic conditions of each site were characterized. Data were collected from the 1st of May to the 1st of October, for the same years as gas exchange parameters were measured. Growing Degree Days (in °C day−1) from 1 May to 1 October were calculated as Tmean-Tbase (only positive values) for each day, using Tbase = 10 °C. Also, accumulated standard evapotranspiration ET0 (mm), and accumulated precipitation (mm) were recorded [31]. 2.2. Gas Exchange MeasurementsLeaf net photosynthesis (An) and stomatal conductance (gs) were measured in a fully exposed mature leaf (one per plant, n = 4–6 per clone). All measurements were performed between 10:00 h and 13:00 h (local time) using an infrared open gas analyser system (Li-6400xt, Li-cor, Inc., Lincoln, NE, USA). The CO2 concentration inside the chamber was 400 µmol CO2 mol−1 air, photosynthetic active radiation (PAR) was always above saturation levels. WUEi was calculated as the ratio between AN and gs. 2.3. Characterization of the Differences in WUEiWe used three different ways to estimate differences in WUEi. The first consists of averaging all the values of a given genotype. However, because of the strong influence of gs upon the WUEi, the method developed by Tortosa et al. [22] was applied in order to overcome this effect. Following this method, first, a general relationship between WUEi and gs is obtained. Provided such a relationship shows a high regression coefficient, the WUEi expected for each gs value is calculated and compared to the observed value for a determined clone obtaining the residual value as percentage (residualclone/predictedclone). The third approach is applied to study in detail differences between two specific clones. For this, we compared their respective slopes and intercepts on their particular WUEi-gs relationship. 2.4. Yield EstimationsAverage yield was provided from Roda site for seven consecutive years. Those data were based on the average plant yield of 8–10 vines per given clone. These data were extrapolated to get an estimated yield in t Ha−1, considering a vine density of 3300 plants Ha−1 (1.5 × 2 m). 2.5. Statistical AnalysisAll statistical analyses were performed using R [32]. First, a global Two-Ways ANOVA was performed with Genotype × Years as main effect and their interaction, within each site. Then, a separated One-Way ANOVAs was performed within each year to check in which year the Genotype effect was significant. When significant, a Post-Hoc test (‘agricolae’ package, [33]) was applied to determine which were different from each other, and so to estimate a ranking. The WUEi-gs relationship was compared (ANCOVA from the ‘car’ package [34] of some specific clones, using the cld analysis from the ‘emmeans’ package [35]. Any differences were accepted with p-value < 0.05. 3. Results 3.1. Experimental Fields Comparison and Year EffectWe compared the WUE of different Tempranillo clones in two experimental sites located in La Rioja (Spain); one located in Logroño belonging to the ICVV Research Institut (“La Grajera” experimental field), and a second one in Haro belonging to the commercial winery Roda. These two locations have a typical Mediterranean climate, with high temperatures and low precipitation in summer. However, slight differences were observed between experimental years and sites (Table 1). The growing degree days were always higher (almost 15%) in La Grajera than in Roda. Related to this, the accumulated ET0 is likewise higher and the total rainfall is slightly lower in La Grajera than in Roda.The water plant status, the main determinant of WUE, was indirectly estimated by the stomatal conductance following Medrano and Flexas 2002 [36]. To compare the impact of the effect of climatic conditions on plant water status, all years and genotypes gs values were averaged (Table 2). In La Grajera, gs varied in average between 0.08 and 0.09 mol H2O m−2 s−1 in four over the five studied years, showing values typical of moderate to severe water deficit. The year 2016 showed the largest gs values reaching 0.13 mol H2O m−2 s−1. In the case of WUEi, the range of variation was between 98 and 124 μmol CO2 mol−1 H2O. Interestingly, we noticed a remarkable increase of WUEi in 2015 compared to 2017 (+25% higher) but at similar gs values (average 0.09 mol H2O m−2 s−1). In parallel we noted an increased net assimilation rate (An) in 2015 compared with 2017 (9.6 and 8.6 μmol CO2 m−2 s−1, respectively). The same effect was found when compared 2018 and 2019.In the Roda field, the gs values were clearly higher than in La Grajera, ranging between 0.13 and 0.39 mol H2O m−2 s−1, which is between a mild to moderate water deficit. The corresponding range of variation in WUEi in this site was lower than in La Grajera (p < 0.001, Table 2) and was between 51 and 86 μmol CO2 mol−1 H2O.Despite the differences between experimental fields in the gs range, when the two general WUEi-gs relationships were compared, there were no differences in either slope or intercept (Figure 1). 3.2. Genotypic Variability of WUEi and Stability over YearsSignificant Genotype and Year effects (and their interaction) in both La Grajera and Roda sites were found (p < 0.001 in both, Table 3 and Table 4 respectively). In La Grajera, extreme values were reached by clones 1084 and 807 (with 87.7 and 108.5 μmol CO2 mol−1 H2O, respectively, all year confounded). When each year was analysed separately, the genotype effect was significant within each year in Roda, and in three out of five years in La Grajera. Moreover, some repetitive patterns were present, like that of clone 1084, showing systematically the lowest values of WUEi. A systematic genotype effect within each year was also present in Roda, with some clones (260, 109) showing the lowest values (−55 μmol CO2 mol−1 H2O) and others showing repetitively the highest WUEi values (clones 463, 44, 6) around 75 μmol CO2 mol−1 H2O.To overcome the WUEi variability induced by the range of variation of gs, each genotype was characterised following its residuals of a general WUEi-gs relationship (see Introduction and Matherial and methods sections), expressed as a percentage (Table 5 and Table 6). Thus, by doing so, we found, globally, the same pattern as the previous comparison (see above). In this case, Roda clones showed more variability with a significant genotype effect in the three measured years in comparison with only two out of five measured years in La Grajera. In Roda, the same genotypes were identified as less (clones 260, 215, 109) or more (44, 463) efficient in terms of WUEi. Moreover, some genotypes were more constant through the years than others. We estimated a Year effect for each clone separately, and the clones 260 and 463 (two extremes) were seen as the most constants over the years (no Year effect).The two extreme clones (260, less efficient and 463, more efficient) were tested in more detail (Figure 2). These clones were revealed to have different WUEi-gs relationships, with similar slopes but a higher intercept for 463 (values of 4.65 and 4.82 respectively). The 463 clone presents a constant higher WUEi of 10%, over the whole range of gs compared to 260. Those data were based on all years confounded. 3.3. Yield Variations between Clones and over YearsTotal yield variation between clones is reported for the Roda site (Table 7). This variation is also shown when comparing total production within different years. Unfortunately, yield data were not compiled during the same years in which gas exchange measurements were performed. However, we used seven consecutive years (from 2003 to 2009) from the same experimental site of Roda to estimate the variability in yield of the same nine tested clones, thus avoiding the potential effect of differential experimental conditions. From the data collected by the company, a huge variability in total production was present between clones, varying from 1.3 to 13.3 t Ha−1 (all years and clones confounded). Because only the average clone data were available for each Genotype*Year, separated ANOVAs of genotype along different years and year comparison was done. The Genotype effect was significant (p < 0.001) but not the Year effect. The total production varied from 9.7 to 3.3 t Ha−1 for clones 463 and 155, respectively. Although any general relationship between yield and WUEi was found, the clone 463 was the most productive in terms of yield and one of the more efficient in terms of WUEi. 4. DiscussionThe present data show, as expected, a wide variability in the estimated WUE among Tempranillo clones in field conditions at both locations. An important component of this variability was clearly due to the “year effect,” a complex integral of differences in climatic conditions along the growing period, which is also largely reported for most agronomic characteristics of grapevine crops including yield and grape quality [37,38].In the present work, we first analysed the absolute values of leaf WUEi (or photosynthetic WUE) to compare different Tempranillo clones between each other. This method presents the disadvantage of including a large variability of WUEi related to soil water availability variations which will be reflected in gs values, and this is the case when plants are measured under realistic field conditions which means a different water status [39,40,41]. Even taking into account this fact, the two-ways ANOVA revealed a clear Genotype effect, confirming the existence of a clonal variability of WUEi within the Tempranillo cultivar. This confirms the results of Tortosa et al. [26]. Moreover, in this work we highlight that those differences are also maintained through the years, thus including the “year effect” as another important factor to be considered under realistic field conditions. This suggests that those differences are truly fixed at a genetic level, because they resulted in being independent of variations in climatic conditions between years. Moreover, the same patterns were repetitively encountered—the same groups of clones were systematically the most efficient, and others were systematically less efficient.We also used a ranking based on residuals of the general WUEi-gs relationship [25]. This method gave the same conclusion as above, resulting in the same groups of clones having systematically the higher or lower WUEi. The advantage of ranking is to consider the whole range of gs and to be able to determine the distance of each data within the general relationship WUE vs gs. This method also has the advantage of removing the stomatal effect. This implies that, if differences are revealed, they come from differences in photosynthetic capacity, and not from different stomatal control. This was the case in our study (especially for Roda site), where there was a good correspondence between the ranking from absolute WUEi values and the percentage analysis. Unfortunately, we do not have data on the photosynthetic capacity of those clones, but it will be very interesting in the future to characterize it.Finally, we tested another approach to compare two extreme clones identified with the other methods. By comparing their intercepts and slopes of WUEi-gs, we found that the slopes were identical, but not the intercepts. This means that for a given gs, the more efficient clone had a systematically higher AN and confirms again the influence of a superior photosynthetic capacity to achieve a greater WUEi, among Tempranillo clones. Even if we did not characterise the photosynthetic capacity of each clone, we can expect that this could be related to differences in leaf CO2 diffusion capacity (not gs but mesophyll conductance), or in biochemical properties of the leaf (higher RubisCO content or more efficient RubisCO), as mentioned by Gago et al. [42] among others [43,44].A main objective of this work was to evaluate whether the WUEi range position of the different clones was maintained through years. In the large majority of cases, we found the same pattern, with the same clones being the most/less efficient throughout several years of measurements. This stability was encountered by calculating differences based on absolute values and also percentages. The differences were weaker in La Grajera since clonal differences were identified three years over five (when comparing absolute values of WUEi) but only two years over five when using percentages. We identified as possible causes of this, that the standard errors are much larger in La Grajera, limiting statistical significance for clonal effect. This could be due to two possible reasons: (1) more variability in the field conditions (soil composition, slope, water availability, etc.) that induce different plant water status/nutrient availability; (2) because the climatic conditions (vapor pressure deficit) also induced lower gs (below 0.1 mol H2O m−2 s−1) that induces a larger variability of the WUEi. On the other hand, in Roda, each year (using absolute values or percentage) showed a clear Genotype effect, reinforcing those clonal differences.As an agronomic reference, the analysis of the grape yield data for the nine evaluated clones in Roda (extrapolated to yield production in Tones/Hectare) also showed large variations even though the climatic conditions variations were in the range of the expected for this location. As for WUEi, some clones showed a capacity to maintain the same ranking in yield compared to other ones (some clones are the most productive, independently of yield variations due to years’ differences).Nevertheless, the results showed clear differences among genotypes, in general without a clear correspondence with the ranking in WUE showing the complex relations among environmental conditions and yield. 5. ConclusionsWith the present results, we confirm the existence of significant clonal variability in WUEi within the Tempranillo cultivar. Those results were shown in two different sites, with two different sets of clones, and across several years of measurements. Clonal differences were apparently due more to differences in photosynthetic capacity than to a more efficient control of water loss. This finding opens new ways for future research which would be focused on the physiological and biochemical basis responsible for the variations in WUEi.
